The market size of online games continues to experience surging growth [1]. At the same time, competitions among them are also becoming very high. The quality of player service plays an important role in winning such competi- tions. It is therefore inevitable to online-game developers and publishers to know their player behaviors so that they can develop game contents that fulfill player demands. Visual- ization techniques have been recently applied to discover in- game player behaviors.
Most work in the literature focuses on visualization of player trails or time series of visited locations for examining the distance over time among the members of a social group [2], discovering playing strategies in a combat game [3], and analyzing movement patterns [4]. Other work focuses on extracting pathways [5] and on locating clusters of similar players based on their movement patterns [6].
This research, however, focuses on visualizing player behaviors based on their actions. According to Bartle’s taxonomy [7], online-game players can be typically identified based on their action behaviors into achievers, explorers,
killers, and socializers. Player-type information should, therefore, be exploited to provide game contents that players favor, for example, a wider variety of collectable items for achievers, longer missions for explorers, more hunting opportunities for killers, and a higher frequency of social events for socializers. It has been recently reported in [8] that Bartle’s taxonomy is also applicable to social data in a web- based application.
In this paper, we propose an approach for visualizing players’ action behaviors using classical multidimensional scaling (CMDS) [9] and KeyGraph [10], both described in Section2. First, CMDS is used for locating clusters of similarly behaving players. KeyGraph is then used for interpreting playing behaviors of players in a cluster of interest. The input to CMDS is derived based on time- series matrices of players’ action sequences which are needlessly long due to noise and redundancy, leading to high computational cost. We, therefore, compute the CMDS input based on reduced time-series matrices obtained by our recently proposed time-series reduction technique in [11]. To make this paper self-contained, this technique is described in Section 3. Evaluation of our visualization approach is given in Section 4, where achievers, explorers, and socializers are found in play log from an online-game used in the evaluation.
In this section, we describe CMDS, KeyGraph, log format, and visualization metrics. As with most other tools for information visualization [12], subjective interpretation is required for KeyGraph. The described visualization metrics are used for facilitating this task in Section 4.2.
CMDS is a prevailing technique for mapping pair-wise rela- tionships to coordinates and has been applied to several areas such as statistics, psychology, sociology, political sciences, and marketing [9]. Recently, this technique has been suc- cessfully applied to clustering of online-game players based on their movement patterns [6]. CMDS takes as its input matrix D, indicating dissimilarities between player pairs, and outputs a coordinate matrix whose configuration minimizes a loss function in preserving all interpoint distances. Two time series of interest are considered similar if they have similar rise and fall patterns, although they might have different scales on the time axis. A good measurement for deriving the distance or dissimilarities between such series is the dynamic time warping (DTW) distance [13].
In our research, the ijth element in D is the DTW distance between the reduced time-series matrices of action sequences of players i and j. In addition, we use the function cmdscale in the Statistical Toolbox of Matlab for performing CMDS and select only the first two dimensions of the constructed coordinates for plotting players.
Understanding the player behaviors is an important issue in improving the service quality of online games. We have proposed a visualization approach that first locates clusters of players who have similar action behaviors using CMDS and then interprets such behaviors of a cluster of interest using KeyGraph. To increase the efficiency in computation of the CMDS input, we have described the use of the time- series reduction technique proposed recently by us in [11]. Evaluation of the proposed approach has been done using log from The ICE, where three clusters have been found to fit three of the four Bartle’s player types, that is, achievers, explorers, and socializers.
Our future work is to apply the proposed approach to log from commercial online games and to examine if Bartle’s player types can be found. It might also be interesting to investigate log formats whose information can be used for automatically identifying other types of Nick Yee’s play motivations.