Why are we even building an n-armed bandit in the first place? Why not just use an A/B/n test? Or maybe get your customer on the phone and ask a question? We have data on what customers buy. So you might own a store that sells perfume or cologne, and you know what people are buying. Here’s the thing though, things change; something might be trendy last week isn’t popular next.
Season’s shift tastes change, and people change as well. Some people are very open to experience while others aren’t. Some are open to exploration, while others want the same thing every time.
N-armed bandits do an excellent job at balancing exploration and exploitation. Whether it’s epsilon greedy, upper confidence bound, Thompson sampling all these algorithms balance. The other reason is that while your employees could ask and make recommendations, this is expensive. You could do that. Asking is what many department stores did for many years. Whether you went to the perfume counter or the paint desk at a hardware store, employees make recommendations. These experts are still precious; they usually know what you need. But here’s the problem: most of the time, what you need is predictable.
We want to eliminate 80% of recommendations, especially when you have millions of users. And n-armed bandits do that. Where suggestions aren’t as obvious, talk with your customer. The Japanese have a concept of Genchi Genbutsu, which I always recommend to clients who have a hard time figuring out their customer need.
There are two significant reasons to use n-armed bandits over A/B/n tests:
Customer value: N-Armed bandits balance exploration and exploitation over time better than A/B/n tests. It squeezes out customer benefits, more playtime, and more conversions. Amazon, Facebook, Spotify have all implemented n-armed bandit style recommendation systems, and they work well.
More company profit: I’d be remiss to point out that n-armed bandits drive more revenue. A lot of pricing algorithms are a bunch of small decisions. UPS is an excellent example of this in practice applied to directions with delivering packages.
With all this power of n-armed bandits comes its own set of problems. Derek Sivers pointed out in a story called I miss the mob that sometimes we can take this too far. The allegory is about how Las Vegas was ran by the Mob, and all they cared about was whether they were making money. Now that MBAs run Vegas, they optimize every square inch for profit. Said, in another way, they have taken the fun out of it.